Just call it a sister thing. Whenever another hockey team has sisters on the rosters, Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson and Monique Lamoureux-Morando take notice.

The U.S. Olympians are twins themselves. Combine that with how few sisters play hockey or reach national teams playing internationally. Then it's easy enough to notice whenever sisters are dressing up for another country.

"It's just cool to see," Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson said.

The Lamoureux sisters will have some sisterly company at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games. Teammate Hannah Brandt's sister, Marissa, plays for the unified Korean women's team. 

Switzerland has two sets of sisters on the roster. They have Nina, Isabel and Monika Waidacher, plus twins Laura and Sara Benz. Canada nearly had its own sister act with Sarah and Amy Potomak. But neither made the Olympic team.

Being sisters definitely can provide an edge in hockey.

"When we get the opportunity to be on the ice together, there's a chemistry that just never goes away." That's according to Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson. 

"It's always there. So whenever we have an opportunity to have a couple shifts together or if we're ever put on a unit or line together, it's always there. And we've pushed each other every day whether it's workouts or during on-ice training. It's just that accountability that we've always had growing up."

Women's hockey didn't debut at the Olympics until 1998 in Nagano. But playing hockey simply was something the Lamoureux sisters were bound to do. They were born in Fargo, North Dakota. Their father, Pierre, played. He played for the University of North Dakota. And all four of their brothers played hockey in college. Brother Jacque was a Hobey Baker finalist. That was in 2009 with Air Force.

The Lamoureux sisters played a year in college at Minnesota. That was before switching to North Dakota. They were there for their final three seasons. Their last season was in 2012-13. They have played internationally for the United States since 2006. Both play forward, though Monique also plays defense. Now 28, the sisters credit each other for their long success. It now includes a third Olympic berth.

"That's part of the reason we've pushed ourselves to this level. We have been competing at this level for quite a long time, It is that built-in accountability day-in, day-out even if we're not with the team," Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson said.

Monique Lamoureux-Davidson calls it the benefit of having grown up together playing every sport together on the same team. Though they haven't played together on the ice as much as people might think. Coaches have often spread the skill by playing them on separate lines.

"It's just that thing when we're on the ice together, we have that undeniable chemistry," she said.

And the American sisters definitely have an Olympic edge. They have won silver medals in both 2010 and 2014. Jocelyne has 11 points in 10 Olympic games, while Monique has 13 points in the same span. The U.S. women's team is chasing the gold medal that eluded the Americans in Sochi. The United States blew a 2-0 lead to Canada in the final at those Games.

For Monique, she's chasing simple fulfillment.